Add example of GDExtension written pure C (#8751)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/scripting/gdextension/gdextension_c_example.rst

simplify writing the extension code. For now it will only contain the definition
of ``GDE_EXPORT``, a macro that makes the function public in the shared library
so Godot can properly call it. This macro helps abstracting what each compiler
expects.

Create the ``defs.h`` file in the ``src`` folder with the following contents:

.. code-block:: c

    #ifndef DEFS_H
    #define DEFS_H

    #include <stdbool.h>
    #include <stddef.h>
    #include <stdint.h>

    #if !defined(GDE_EXPORT)
    #if defined(_WIN32)
    #define GDE_EXPORT __declspec(dllexport)
    #elif defined(__GNUC__)
    #define GDE_EXPORT __attribute__((visibility("default")))
    #else
    #define GDE_EXPORT
    #endif
    #endif // ! GDE_EXPORT

    #endif // DEFS_H

We also include some standard headers to make things easier. Now we only have to
include ``defs.h`` and those will come as a bonus.

Now, let's implement the functions we just declared. Create a file called
``init.c`` in the ``src`` folder and add this code:

.. code-block:: c

    #include "init.h"

    void initialize_gdexample_module(void *p_userdata, GDExtensionInitializationLevel p_level)

>     {

Reviewer: I'd suggest following the code style for this code as well, with brackets on the declaration

functions that will act as methods. The plan is to make this a custom node that
inherits from :ref:`Sprite2D <class_Sprite2D>`.

Create a file called ``gdexample.h`` in the ``src`` folder with the following
contents:

.. code-block:: c

    #ifndef GDEXAMPLE_H
    #define GDEXAMPLE_H

    #include "gdextension_interface.h"

    #include "defs.h"

    // Struct to hold the node data.
    typedef struct
    {
        // Metadata.
        GDExtensionObjectPtr object; // Stores the underlying Godot object.
    } GDExample;

    // Constructor for the node.
    void gdexample_init(GDExample *self);

    // Destructor for the node.
    void gdexample_terminate(GDExample *self);

    // Bindings.
    void gdexample_bind_methods();

    #endif // GDEXAMPLE_H

The only things special here are the ``object`` field, which holds a pointer to
the Godot object, and the ``gdexample_bind_methods`` function, which will
register the metadata of our custom class (properties, methods, and signals).
The latter is not entirely necessary, as we can do it when registering the
class, but it makes clearer to separate the concerns and let our class register
its own metadata.

> The  ``object`` field is necessary because our class will inherit a Godot class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``object`` field is necessary because our class will inherit a Godot class.
```

    void bind_property(
        const char *class_name,
        const char *name,
        GDExtensionVariantType type,
        const char *getter,
        const char *setter)
    {
        StringName class_string_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&class_string_name, class_name);
        GDExtensionPropertyInfo info = make_property(type, name);
        StringName getter_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&getter_name, getter);
        StringName setter_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&setter_name, setter);

        api.classdb_register_extension_class_property(class_library, &class_string_name, &info, &setter_name, &getter_name);

        // Destruct things.
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&class_string_name);
        destruct_property(&info);
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&getter_name);
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&setter_name);
    }

This function is similar to the one for binding methods. The main difference is
that we don't need an extra struct since we can simple use the
``GDExtensionPropertyInfo`` that is created by our helper function, so it's more

> straightforward. It only consists of creating the ``StringName`` values from the
> C strings, creating a property info struct using our helper, calling the API
> function to register the property in the class, then destructing all the objects
> we created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
straightforward. It only creates the ``StringName`` values from the
C strings, creates a property info struct using our helper, calls the API
function to register the property in the class and then destructs all the objects
we created.
```

With this done, we can extend the ``gdexample_bind_methods()`` function in the
``gdexample.c`` file:

.. code-block:: c

    void gdexample_bind_methods()
    {
        bind_method_0_r("GDExample", "get_amplitude", gdexample_get_amplitude, GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT);
        bind_method_1("GDExample", "set_amplitude", gdexample_set_amplitude, "amplitude", GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT);
        bind_property("GDExample", "amplitude", GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT, "get_amplitude", "set_amplitude");

        bind_method_0_r("GDExample", "get_speed", gdexample_get_speed, GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT);
        bind_method_1("GDExample", "set_speed", gdexample_set_speed, "speed", GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT);
        bind_property("GDExample", "speed", GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_FLOAT, "get_speed", "set_speed");
    }

If you build the extension with ``SCons``, you'll see in the Godot editor the new property shown
not only on the documentation page for the custom class but also in the Inspector dock when the
``GDExample`` node is selected.

.. image:: img/gdextension_c_inspector_properties.webp

Binding virtual methods
-----------------------

> Our custom node now has properties to influence how it operates, but it still
> does not do anything. In this section, we will bind the virtual method
> :ref:`_process<class_Node_private_method__process>` and make our custom sprite
> move a little bit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our custom Node now has properties to influence how it operates, but it still
doesn't do anything. In this section, we will bind the virtual method
:ref:`_process<class_Node_private_method__process>` and make our custom sprite
move a little bit.
```

        operators.string_name_equal = variant_get_ptr_operator_evaluator(GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_OP_EQUAL, GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_STRING_NAME, GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_STRING_NAME);
    }

As you can see we need a new local helper here in order to grab the function
pointer for the operator.

With this handy, we can easily create our comparison function in the same file:

.. code-block:: c

    bool is_string_name_equal(GDExtensionConstStringNamePtr p_a, const char *p_b)
    {
        // Create a StringName for the C string.
        StringName string_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&string_name, p_b);

        // Compare both StringNames.
        bool is_equal = false;
        operators.string_name_equal(p_a, &string_name, &is_equal);

        // Destroy the created StringName.
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&string_name);

        // Return the result.
        return is_equal;
    }

This function simply creates a ``StringName`` from the argument, compares with
the other one using the operator function pointer, and returns the result. Note
that the return value for the operator is passed as an out reference, this is a
common thing in the API.

> Let's go back the the ``gdexample.h`` file and add a couple of functions that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's go back to the ``gdexample.h`` file and add a couple of functions that
```

will be used as the callbacks for the Godot API:

.. code-block:: c

    void *gdexample_get_virtual_with_data(void *p_class_userdata, GDExtensionConstStringNamePtr p_name);
    void gdexample_call_virtual_with_data(GDExtensionClassInstancePtr p_instance, GDExtensionConstStringNamePtr p_name, void *p_virtual_call_userdata, const GDExtensionConstTypePtr *p_args, GDExtensionTypePtr r_ret);

> There are actually two ways of registering virtual methods. One only has the
> ``get`` part, in which you give Godot a properly crafted function pointer which
> will be called. For this we would need to create another helper for each virtual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are actually two ways of registering virtual methods. Only one has the
``get`` part, in which you give Godot a properly crafted function pointer which
will be called. For this we would need to create another helper for each virtual
```

method, something that is not very convenient. Instead, we use the second method
which allows us to return any data, and then Godot will call a second callback
and give us back this data along with the call information. We can simply give
our own function pointer as custom data and then have a single callback for all
virtual methods. Although in this example we will only use it for one method,
this way is simpler to expand.

So let's implement those two functions in the ``gdexample.c`` file:

.. code-block:: c

    void *gdexample_get_virtual_with_data(void *p_class_userdata, GDExtensionConstStringNamePtr p_name)
    {
        // If it is the "_process" method, return a pointer to the gdexample_process function.
        if (is_string_name_equal(p_name, "_process"))
        {
            return (void *)gdexample_process;
        }
        // Otherwise, return NULL.
        return NULL;
    }

    void gdexample_call_virtual_with_data(GDExtensionClassInstancePtr p_instance, GDExtensionConstStringNamePtr p_name, void *p_virtual_call_userdata, const GDExtensionConstTypePtr *p_args, GDExtensionTypePtr r_ret)
    {
        // If it is the "_process" method, call it with a helper.

>         if (is_string_name_equal(p_name, "_process"))

Reviewer 3: This is re-creating the StringName `"_process"` every process frame, isn't it? It would be nice to avoid that here.

The second one is similar. If it is the ``_process`` method, it uses the given
function pointer to call the ``ptrcall`` helper, passing the call arguments
forward. Otherwise it simply does nothing, since we don't have any other virtual
methods being implemented.

The only thing missing is using those callbacks when the class is registered. Go
to the ``init.c`` file and change the ``class_info`` initialization to include
those, replacing the ``NULL`` value used previously:

.. code-block:: c

    void initialize_gdexample_module(void *p_userdata, GDExtensionInitializationLevel p_level)
    {
        ...

        GDExtensionClassCreationInfo2 class_info = {
            ...
            .get_virtual_call_data_func = gdexample_get_virtual_with_data,
            .call_virtual_with_data_func = gdexample_call_virtual_with_data,
            ...
        };

        ...
    }

This is enough to bind the virtual method. If you build the extension and run
the demo project again, the ``_process`` function will be called. You just won't
be able to tell since the function itself does nothing visible. We will solve
this now by making the custom node move following a pattern.

> In order to make our node do stuff, we'll need to call Godot methods. Not only
> the GDExtension API functions as we've being doing so far, but actual engine
> methods, as we would do with scripting. This naturally require some extra setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to make our Node do stuff, we'll need to call Godot methods. Not only
the GDExtension API functions as we've being doing so far, but actual engine
methods, as we would do with scripting. This naturally requires some extra setup.
```

    } constructors;

    ...

    struct Methods
    {
        GDExtensionMethodBindPtr node2d_set_position;
    } methods;

    struct API
    {
        ...
        GDExtensionInterfaceClassdbGetMethodBind classdb_get_method_bind;
        GDExtensionInterfaceObjectMethodBindPtrcall object_method_bind_ptrcall;
    } api;

Then in the ``api.c`` file we can grab the function pointers from Godot:

.. code-block::

    void load_api(GDExtensionInterfaceGetProcAddress p_get_proc_address)
    {
        // Get helper functions first.
        ...
        GDExtensionInterfaceVariantGetPtrConstructor variant_get_ptr_constructor = (GDExtensionInterfaceVariantGetPtrConstructor)p_get_proc_address("variant_get_ptr_constructor");

        // API.
        ...
        api.classdb_get_method_bind = (GDExtensionInterfaceClassdbGetMethodBind)p_get_proc_address("classdb_get_method_bind");
        api.object_method_bind_ptrcall = p_get_proc_address("object_method_bind_ptrcall");

        // Constructors.
        ...
        constructors.vector2_constructor_x_y = variant_get_ptr_constructor(GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_VECTOR2, 3); // See extension_api.json for indices.

        ...
    }

> The only special thing here is the ``Vector2`` constructor, which we request the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only noteworthy part here is the ``Vector2`` constructor, in which we request the
```

index ``3``. Since there are multiple constructors with different kinds of
arguments, we need to specify which one we want. In this case we're getting the
one that takes two float numbers as the ``x`` and ``y`` coordinates, hence the
name. This index can be retrieved from the ``extension_api.json`` file. Note we
also need a new local helper to get it.

> Note that we don't get anything for the methods struct here. This is because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Be aware that we don't get anything for the methods struct here. This is because
```

Reviewer 2: Instead of ``Note`` since that was just used for the prior sentence

implement the helper:

.. code-block:: c

    void load_api(GDExtensionInterfaceGetProcAddress p_get_proc_address)
    {
        // API.
        ...
        api.classdb_register_extension_class_signal = p_get_proc_address("classdb_register_extension_class_signal");

        ...
    }

    void bind_signal_1(
        const char *class_name,
        const char *signal_name,
        const char *arg1_name,
        GDExtensionVariantType arg1_type)
    {
        StringName class_string_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&class_string_name, class_name);
        StringName signal_string_name;
        constructors.string_name_new_with_utf8_chars(&signal_string_name, signal_name);

        GDExtensionPropertyInfo args_info[] = {
            make_property(arg1_type, arg1_name),
        };

        api.classdb_register_extension_class_signal(class_library, &class_string_name, &signal_string_name, args_info, 1);

        // Destruct things.
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&class_string_name);
        destructors.string_name_destructor(&signal_string_name);
        destruct_property(&args_info[0]);
    }

> This one is very similar to the function to bind methods. The main difference is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This implementation is very similar to the function to bind methods. The main difference is
```

        constructors.variant_from_vector2_constructor = api.get_variant_from_type_constructor(GDEXTENSION_VARIANT_TYPE_VECTOR2);

        // Destructors.
        ...
        destructors.variant_destroy = p_get_proc_address("variant_destroy");

        ...
    }

    ...

    void call_2_args_stringname_vector2_no_ret_variant(GDExtensionMethodBindPtr p_method_bind, GDExtensionObjectPtr p_instance, const GDExtensionTypePtr p_arg1, const GDExtensionTypePtr p_arg2)
    {
        // Set up the arguments for the call.
        Variant arg1;
        constructors.variant_from_string_name_constructor(&arg1, p_arg1);
        Variant arg2;
        constructors.variant_from_vector2_constructor(&arg2, p_arg2);
        GDExtensionConstVariantPtr args[] = {&arg1, &arg2};

        // Add dummy return value storage.
        Variant ret;

        // Call the function.
        api.object_method_bind_call(p_method_bind, p_instance, args, 2, &ret, NULL);

        // Destroy the arguments that need it.
        destructors.variant_destroy(&arg1);
        destructors.variant_destroy(&ret);
    }

> This helper has some boilerplate but is quite straightforward. It sets up the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This helper function has some boilerplate code but is quite straightforward. It sets up the
```

Reviewer 2: ``quite straightforward`` should also be avoided as it sounds like it's trivial to understand. Perhaps just end the sentence after ``boilerplate``

two arguments inside stack allocated Variants, then creates an array with
pointers to those. It also sets up another Variant to keep the return value,
which we don't need to construct since the call expects it to be uninitialized.

Then it actually calls the MethodBind using the instance we provided and the
arguments. The ``NULL`` at the end would be a pointer to a
``GDExtensionCallError`` struct. This can be used to treat potential errors when
calling the functions (such as wrong arguments). For the sake of simplicity
we're not gonna handle that here.

> At then end we need to destruct the Variants we created. While technically the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At the end we need to destruct the Variants we created. While technically the
```
